### A fantasy of a harmonious digital revolution

In December 2018, the Greater Manchester Combined Authority released the [Greater Manchester Digital Strategy](https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/media/1090/digital-strategy-2018-2020.pdf). In it, Manchester is transformed... it is no longer a place with any downsides. Inequality, pollution, homelessness, and democracy have all been solved thanks to global verture capitalists seeing to make fortunes. These rich global investors will help to create wonderful creative jobs for everyone in an innovative utopia of creativity, a place of global significance but unique local character, and a place that does not tolerate social deprivation. It will be Silicon Valley in the North of England - without any of the downsides that exist in California.

It would be lovely if this were real, but of course this is a complete fantasy. But there is nothing unique in having such grandiose and fantastical economic delusions. The wonderful smart city of the future is a dream many other cities are chasing, and few (if any) of these visions examine the dark side of the Silicon Valley economy that is inseparable from the beautiful and innovative facade. Instead of being encouraging new solutions based on local character, the global smart city enables capitalism make every city the same, centralising power into the hands of a few lucky winners and massive digital monopolies, based on the same economics foundations that are part of the reason that the world is facing economic and political crisis. Instead, Manchester has a much radical traditions that we can use to make a better digital economy that works better for the vast majority (but possibly not for the rich).

### Only Geeks Invited

This digital stand of the Greater Manchester Strategy kicked off in 2017 with Andy Burnham setting up a digital summit, [a promise he made in his mayoral election manifesto](https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/andy4mayor/pages/68/attachments/original/1489493923/Andy_Burham_Manifesto_A4_12pp_copy.pdf?1489493923), in order to create a city "where technology is used to deliver positive change". Great excitement seems to have surrounded the event in the tech world, as Andy Burnham invited over [over 200 experts from the digital and tech community](https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/news/crowdsourced-digital-action-plan-to-take-greater-manchester-to-the-top/) as well as other "key influencers" (Digital Strategy page X). One attendee [remarking on a "pretty stellar" line-up](https://cityverve.org.uk/setting-the-agenda-for-a-digital-manchester/), while even Loz Kaye, a privacy campaigner often critical of the council, [got caught up in the excitement in the positivity](link). This positivity seems to come from Andy Burham promises to invest in digital business, his desire to ensure this investment tech will "do good", solving social, environmental and economic problems in today's world. However, for a plan that aims to solve social and environmental challenges, it seems somewhat strange not invite anyone who might have expertise in those areas? Only tech experts seemed to be welcome, the people perhaps that _want_ to believe that tech can solve all our problems. Andy Burnham could have tried learning the lessons of Silicon Valley, where over-confident geeks believed they can solve all our social issues. Instead they ended up causing global chaos. However, inviting experts on these subjects would burst this optimistic utopian bubble, as most academics in social science and climate change realise that its a little bit more complicated than building new tech to solve all our problems. 

This absence of critical voices is reflected in the Greater Manchester Digital Strategy. The tone utterly utopian. Except for one vague reference (seemingly to the potentially uncertainty of automation and AI) the document seems to recognise no downsides to any aspect of the digital economy. There is no serious investigation about whether tech will improve society. Instead, the strategy merely functions as a shiny brochure that presents tells us that more economic growth, more tech, and entrepreneurial zeal will create a future where everyone is happy, living in harmony alongside nature, without pollution and without any social problems. The smart city means all our problems are fixed without any politicians having to make difficult decisions, and without any business having to be taxed or regulated. Hurrah! The trendy and exciting  digital lexicon of Californian start-ups culture helps cover over the absence of any solid empirical evidence and critical thought: simply calling things "open", "connective", "networked", "bottom-up", and "democratic" creates a fantasy of a better world. By using this language, it avoids having to investigate whether this is _truly_ improving society at all.

The key targets seem to indicate the overall picture, where targets for improving business profitability and an absence of any targets on ensuring better social and environment conditions in Manchester. The measures include increased economic growth, as well as an increase in wages (for those in digital jobs). It will also measure a decrease businesses turning down work because of a lack of skills and reduce problems due to poor digital infrastructure. So far it is entirely about ensuring private profits keep going up. The last two measures include increasing digital literacy  and a focus on decreasing the gender gap in digital workplaces. These may _appear_ to be about social issues, but from the perspective of critical economics, it is less clear. The document says that it wants Manchester to be the best place to invest in digital business - but the fact that many people in Greater Manchester do not use digital services is a barrier to profit. This target could be as much about ensuring older people have enough computer knowledge to buy stuff online and order an Uber from their phone as much as it is about ensuring older people are able to avoid isolation and loneliness. A friend that works in NHS physio for older people tells me that home workers are under a lot of pressure to get older people using iPads and other "smart" tech to do excercises at home. This creates ridiculous situations where physios spend more time trying to teach older people to use computers than actually doing excercises. When physios use paper printouts of excercises, it is much easier. It seems there is a big NHS budget for giving money to private businesses for ridiculous and unnecessary tech even while the NHS is struggling to pay for basic services. Our public services are being used to funnel money to private businesses and startups rather than actually serving the public need. Critical academics might question whether older people _want_ to go online or [whether they are being forced to do so.](https://phys.org/news/2018-03-older-people-digital-technologies.html). That leaves only one point on gender equality in tech that definitively is addressing a social problem. This is [clearly](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2018/11/01/google-employees-worldwide-begin-walkout-over-allegations-sexual-harassment-inequality-within-company/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.8bb01e75284b) a [major](https://www.theverge.com/2018/7/16/17576808/uber-gender-discrimination-federal-investigation) [issue](https://notesfrombelow.org/article/tech-workers-platform-workers-and-workers-inquiry) but then this is only one issue of many inside tech companies such as [being fired for unionising](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2018/04/lanetix-tech-workers-unionization-campaign-firing), [extreme working hours, awful for everyone but which specifically discriminates against those with health issues](https://medium.com/s/story/techs-long-hours-are-discriminatory-counter-productive-17dc61071ed5), and [racism](https://www.theverge.com/2018/11/30/18119832/tesla-elon-musk-discrimination-harassment-racism). So this point is good for workers, but not nearly enough considering the many problems tech workers face. And none of these measure the disastrous impact that the Silicon Valley economic model has on the rest of society.

As a result, none of these targets or measurements focuses on the massive social issues that have come about as a result of Silicon Valley's startup economy. The vast centralisation of power and data that occurs when Google, Facebook, Amazon and so on hoover up most of the successful startups. No mention of mass-surviellance, online hate, income inequality, tech company accountability, using tech for building military weapons or any of the many social issues that frequently appear in the news in 2019. In the place of specific strategies and targets to ensure tech is used for the benefit of all are vague aspirations, visions, anecdotes, or impossible to measure targets such as "establishing Greater Manchester as the best city-region for social innovation" and "BLAH". The unstated assumption is that economic growth and new tech will solve all these problems, or else that simply stating that inequality will "not be tolerated" will mean these problems sort themselves out. Tech folks, have a look around... it isn't working. More gadgets will not fix our massive social problems. The Silicon Valley utopia is creating a nightmare.


### Frictionless Capitalism

The word "friction" can say a lot... and also hide a lot. If you have any kind of machinery, you want consider that friction is something that stops it operating smoothly. So friction must be bad! The problem is that friction in the "digital ecosystem" could be anything from your permission, regulations about lawful use of data, or workers rights, or trade unions demanding that workers have decent working conditions and pay. Removal of all possible frictions - regulations, unions, rights, and so on, this has long been a libertarian utopia of the government getting out of the way, and letting the rationality of the market dictate what happens. The Internet has made such dreams seem a little bit more possible. Unshackled from the limitations of the physical world where were are constrained by geography, borders, and governments, the Internet can finally release capitalism and bring about a glorious free market world. The GM Digital Strategy reveals this libertarian dream in it promise to removal all friction, which says it wants to ensure "our digital ecosystem is as frictionless as possible" to create world that benefits everyone. This will create "the best environment to nurture, welcome and grow digital businesses". As (WHO?) Featherstone says, this is an fantasy of a “neoliberal zero-gravity utopia, where flows [of commodities, money, and data] push towards light speeds” (Featherstone 2010:
128). Of course, the people of Greater Manchester hasn't been consulted about whether we want this libertarian dream, the writers of the strategy have decided for us. Echoing Thatcher's mantra of "there is no alternative", the report says "we must" do it, because if we don't, we will be left behind. The idea that there might be an alternative way to run the economy is not even considered.

Data collection is an essential part of the digital economy, and the phrase "data is the new oil" is a tedious and mindless phrase often thrown by the business class at tech gatherings. This mantra suggests that data is some kind of abstract resource that miraculously appears from nowhere, as if is not actually data about people and our lives, our conversations and private information. I suspect the business class particularly like this phrase because it hides the fact that data is usually about _people_. Data is an rights issue, a class issue, a race issue, and more... because data can use to categorise people and make decisions about us. It is increasingly use to [profile people, for example, by race and predict in advance who will be a criminal](https://www.newscientist.com/article/2166207-discriminating-algorithms-5-times-ai-showed-prejudice/). It can be used to deny health insurance (LINK), or target the poor with payday loans (REF). Despite the vacuous nature of this phrase, it can tell us that the business class has a fantasy of free flowing data without any awkward discussions about privacy and rights. This is because the flow of data is essential to digital companies. The optimistic talk of innovation, growth, jobs and so on, cover over the fact these companies in capitalist society are often reliant on data collection. Its much easier to create a profitable business model based on data collection, as evidenced by [a McKinsey report (p26)](https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/McKinsey%20Analytics/Our%20Insights/The%20age%20of%20analytics%20Competing%20in%20a%20data%20driven%20world/MGI-The-Age-of-Analytics-Full-report.ashx). With tens of thousands of UK new startups appearing in the UK [every year](https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidprosser/2018/04/06/uk-technology-start-ups-hit-all-time-high/#c0f3bf45d855). In this incredibly competitive environment, it is much easier to make a business model that runs on collecting and selling data about people - if you can succeed in doing so, your business is almost guaranteed to work, as good quality data is a commodity that is both profitable and easy to sell.

EDITED TO HERE

The Greater Manchester Digital Strategy recognises the need to create the best environment for digital businesses possible. To be the most successful digital city, it will have to create a better environment than the other major cities all trying to do the same thing. It will need to attract skilled digital people and also investors who think that this will be the best place to get a return on their money. As such, the competition to be the best global smart city looks more like a global race to the bottom - the city that can remove the most "friction" will surely be one of the places where investors can also earn the most cash. Greater Manchester has already seen some interventions that seem to indicate possible trends towards removing the friction of having to ask your permission to collect data and surveil citizens - [GCHQ has launched a start-up "accelarator" in Manchester](https://mspl.co.uk/news/gchq-launches-first-manchester-tech-start-up-accelerator/), and the Trafford Centre seem to have been [choosing surveilance by default](https://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/trafford-centre-greater-manchester-police-15279902). Local activists have been fighting other surveilance measures such as advertising boards with cameras that track people's responses (REF) - but instead of just stopping with demanding that companies respect our rights, we need to look at the larger economic trends. Capitalism is making our lives worse across the whole world, continuing to obsessively cling to burning oil even as it destroys our planet, and justifying zero-hours contracts in times when people are in enormous insecurity and poverty. This 21st century capitalism does not has absolutely no ethics about where growth and profit comes from. Antinio Garcia's compelling and inredibly readable account of the startup culture describes his experience of setting up a startup, getting acquired and ending up working for Facebook. Dreams of changing the world for good are sacrificed for to demands of venture capitalists that demand startups become billion dollar companies or die trying. He admits being totally "intoxicated" by these fantasise, but ultimately finds that "capitalism is an amoral farce". Companies can get away with racist, mysognistic organisations, that profit from  breaking the law, exploiting the poor and creating vast inequality, because in this culture "success forgives all sins". This is evident in Wendy Liu's personal account of [trying to create a data science startup, which was forced to become a data collection and advertising business](https://notesfrombelow.org/article/silicon-inquiry) simply in order to survive. Its easy to see how big initially idealistic companies like Facebook and Google found data collection business model irrestistable. The dreams that people have when founding a startup are no match for the cold amorality of the capitalist economy. If privacy has to be sacrificed to achieve the smart city utopia, then have no doubts that it will. The way to stop it is not to ask corporations to be nice and respect our rights, the solution is to _change the economy_.


### Free Software could be a genunie utopia

The fantasy of Greater Manchester's Digital Strategy rests on believing that the free market, innovation, and venture capitalism can take us a to utopian future which solves all of our social needs. More than anything else, it relies on avoiding looking the vast amount of empirical evidence that shows the Silicon Valley economy is causing huge social destruction. While we may have drones that can [deliver orders to us from Amazon in less than 30 mins](https://www.lifewire.com/amazon-delivery-drones-4155300), the focus on the technology rather than the economy distracts from the important issues. Examining power and capitalism is essential. Many startups and developers get caught into capitalism, thinking their dreams can be delivered by profits and growth. Zuckerberg, I believe, genuinelt had utopian dream of making the world a better place through connecting the world, and ended up creating a nightmare. Capitalism requires making a profit, and doesn't give a shit about your dreams. Manchester's history can teach us a lot about a different economic model that questions power and ownership. Andy Burnham loves to cite Manchester's history of creating innovative solutions, but what he fails completely to see that he is demanding that Manchester use the Silicon Valley econoomic model is spectacularly failing the world.

I argued before that mass-surveillance and privacy erosion are inevitable by-products of an economic system that is desperate for data. This data is an easy to find raw material that is simple to turn into profit. So fighting for data privacy and an end to surveillance can't be done without fighting this monetisation of data. We need economic alternatives that show another way. A radical vision of common ownership and equality was born in Rochdale with the birth of the cooperative movement. A model like this where users are all part of a cooperative that makes democratic decisions would empower people to protect their data. This _is_ possible in the digital economy, and is proven by digital cooperatives that are working today. In Catalonia, the Cooperativa Integral Catalana (CIC) is testing the possiblities of worker owned technologies. Its stated purpose is to create an alternative economy that satisfies the needs of the people in the region. https://p2pfoundation.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/The-Catalan-Integral-Cooperative.pdf. [CoTech](https://www.coops.tech/manifesto) is an network of successful digital cooperatives that are succeeding. Their manifesto asks us "to reject the false assumption that only multinational conglomerates or private equity-funded startups can be great tech companies".  Andy Burnham _supposedly_ supports this model - he is a member of the Cooperative Party and claims to want to make Manchester a "cooperative city" ([LINK]). However, in the Manchester Digital Strategy document, cooperatives are not even mentioned once. Additionally, Andy Burnham makes no mention of John McDonnell's Alternative Models of Ownership report that seeks to empower and encourage the growth of cooperatives and other forms of worker-ownership. As such, he is totally failing to examine ways that the Digital Strategy will make Greater Manchester a more unequal and divided city. 

Going further than cooperative movement, we can look the concept of the commands and the Free Software Foundation for a different utopian dream of tech equality and empowerment. The commons is usually used in discussions about land - before capitalist land ownership, our farmland and forests were common land, land which belonged to everyone, where responsiblity for maintaining it is shared across society. Free Software builds on the idea of [the commons](https://www.monbiot.com/1994/01/01/the-tragedy-of-enclosure/) to demand that software, data and knowledge should be free for everyone to use and modify. Free software brings back the idea of the commons and its radical potential, and is a massive challenge to capitalist ownership, where personal data, software and knowledge belongs to a private company. Personal data is just a commodity to buy and sell, and as the Facebook crisis has shown, users of the service have absolutely no idea what they do with it until these companies get caught. However, the commons is a vital and unrecognised part of the Internet. Most of the world's servers run Linux, a free operating system (which you can also use instead of Windows on your home computer, and in my opinion, is much better!). Wikipedia exists as a commons - a totally free resource, where information is reusable by anyone and where responsibility for editing it is shared. LibreOffice is one of many entirely free software packages and show that this is possible.  Free software can allow us to imagine a world where everyone has control and ownership of the information about them. 

Free software alternatives to social media sites do exist too, but as companies like Facebook, Google and Twitter have grown in power, they have benefited from the "network effect" where the more users a site has, the more people will use it. Free alternatives stuggled when few people joined and posted, which meant that people are less inclined to go back, creating a cycle of declining use. While Free Software advocates as us to imagine a world where [free software is the norm](), in a world where money equals power, Free Software will never become mainstream until we change the economy. As such, resisting surveillance and commodification of personal information [is not a technical struggle, it is a political one](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/02/free-software-movement-richard-stallman-linux-open-source-enclosure/).  The fantastical language of the GM Digital Strategy is entirely decietful. It suggests politics just needs to get out the way so that the digital corporations and entrepeneurs can deliver our utopia. The political struggle to take back control of our personal data  requires the destruction of [Silicon Valley culture and economics](link) and it means politicising the commons.  Bill Gates could see this - he suggest the free Software movement is similar to Communism, but the Free Software activists have widely avoiding making this link, as they have not engaged in the economic and political analysis of software. The Labour Party, which of course, Andy Burnham is a prt of recently released a report that is relevent to the idea of the digital commons, which was [a report into land ownership](https://commonsfilm.com/2019/06/11/a-bold-agenda-for-treating-land-as-a-commons/). This report challenges the vast private ownership of land in the UK, which is mostly in the hands of a few extremely wealthy and powerful people. We can draw a comparison to this with the way a few vastly wealthy and powerful companies own most of the world's personal data, and therefore expanding the digital Commons would help to solve this. While Labour have challenged the tax avoidance schemes of global data giants, they should also champion the digital commons, which provides a vision of a better digital world for the vast majority of people.

While free software social media platforms have failed, they could absolutely succeed with political backing and support. What if taxes from digital corporations went into supporting free software alternatives? What about if Greater Manchester's Digital Strategy planned to give free workspaces, training, servers and other resources to free software developers and cooperatives? Perhaps when local software gets acquired by a multinational corporation, local communities should get the chance to acquire it first as a free software, owned collectively by the people of Greater Manchester. The vision of a better future could be articulated in a way that challenges the continuous private ownership of our data. This world could look a little bit like the developer communities around the Raspberry Pi. The Raspberry Pi is a little computer that you can pick up for £30. It runs Linux and can be used to build anything from a PC, to a tablet, to a home email server, to a games console, to a smart TV, to a music system. Local Raspberry Pi groups are full of young people learning to program and developing cool things, full of big ideas and excitement. But these groups seem to just be a path to enable kids to learn to code so that they can go and work for a private company. Kids then grow up to be adults and give up those cool creative projects for tedious programming jobs for big companies, or creating stratups that have to provide massive finanical returns to global investors. The dreams that kids had at these groups have are replaced by the mundane reality of capitalism work. Instead, if the free software movement was supported and encouraged by the government and Greater Manchester, these exicting and empowering developer communities could be _what work is like all the time_ for many developers and entrepreneurs. We might see developers on every area able to quickly set up free software services for local people, providing social media sites that are run by people on your street. Local community groups would hold store your data but the right to your information would be entirely yours. Local developers could respond to the needs of each community by customising social media sites based on feedback in meetings with local people. No longer would people have to keep upgrading phones and PCs because of planned obsolescence, or because they want a new feature, or because of a hardware fault. In a free software economy a strong local community of developers would exist to replace or upgrade hardware, add new features to your devices, and help to improve performance. A few years ago, there was a viral campaign to fund a new design for a phone called PhoneBloks, a modular phone where you could replace any part, totally customisable and upgradeable. Major corporations have been involved, [Google in particular](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_wwrIpv38nE), but decided not to get involved. It turns out that the digital waste culture where you are required to throw away your phone every other year makes massive profits. The way to liberate ourselves from digital surviellance, a throwaway culture, and gain control over our digital lives could lie with free software, but this is a massive challenge to capitalism. The only way to get there is by political struggle against powerful interests. This could be a geniune digital utopia. Of course, getting there is immensely difficult. But it is actually easier than achieving the utopian vision of the GM Digital Strategy, which is literally impossible. There can be no utopian digital liberation in capitalism, only more surviellance and inequality. We need to let go of this impossible capitalist utopia and fight for one that could really bring about a better world.








### Discarded






Unions, ethical use of tech, discrimination. How often are people forced to throw away an iPhone purchased only a couple of years ago because it is slow or won't run the lastest apps? This is a huge waste of resources, and with environmental destruction that comes with mining for these metals, not to mention the human cost, it is unthinkable that we can continue to allow tech companies to create products that are designed to break. Trade unions in alliance with consumers (link http://cftn.ca/sites/default/files/AcademicLiterature/Where%20are%20the%20Workers%20in%20Consumer-Worker%20Alliances.pdf) with tech workers could demand and end to these practices.

Any company using open data should be open source. 

A truly radical vision for the GM Digital Strategy could also include rights of consumers over our software and hardware that we buy, and the Free Software movement could give us an idea of what this looks like. In a recent interview, Richard Stallman articulates the radical nature of this, where it is a right for every tech user to be able to rewrite software code, replace hardware components, to take apart our technologies apart completely and rebuild them. Microsoft foreces us to download new versions of Windows that are slower and take up more space when many people are perfectly happy with older versions of Windows. If everyone knew how to run and install Linux on their computers this would stop happening overnight. Linux does not force you to download junk programs you don't want, is slim and efficient, and works in a modular way (you only install the components you want). The GM Manchester Strategy sees education for people so that they can merely end for work; but education should be also be an end in itself. There are regular meetings to teach users about coding and tech such as Raspberry Pi meetings. When I have been this attracts a lot of young people, and its inspiring to see young kids getting involved. But should children be taught great skills merely in order to get a stressful coding job at a big tech company, or put vast energy and long hours into setting up a startup that has a high likelihood of failing? Why not instead say that people have a right to create their own technology for themselves? Over the last few weeks, I made myself a "smart TV" with a £30 Raspberry Pi 3. It is about the size of a box of matches, but allows me to watch Netflix, iPlayer, YouTube, and so on, as well as organising all my music on it. And I can customise it completely. With free software like Linux and cheap and affordable hardware like a Raspberry Pi for everyone in GM to be build their own computers, webservers, email servers, smart TVs, game consoles and so on. I have recently been working on some of these projects and its not hard to set up, and Raspberry Pi costs only around £30. Imagine a world where everyone has the skills and the resources to build their own technologies, and the right to take everything apart and understand it. Community coding workshops would expand and projects Levenshulme's Repair Cafe would proliferate, as commununities were all able to meet people's needs with technologies, and everything piece of tech could be repurposed, nothing would need to go to waste. This could be a circular economy of technology that encourages reuse. Rather than the GM Ditigal Strategy's ridiculous notion of a ecological society within an excessively wasteful and destructive Silicon Valley model, the free software movement make a massive difference in helping to rebalance or relationship with the natural world. The fact that Linux is running the majority of the Internet services in the world, written mostly by people in their free time for no money, shows that this is possible. https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-software-for-freedom.en.html




The Free Software movement has the potentially to be radically anti-capitalist, resistant to patents, money-power and exploitation, and yes, probably is something that even a radical government under John McDonnell would struggle to include. But it does provide a utopian vision for tech workers to envisage a far better world

What





-------


ownership - Fuchs, Labour...
Free software; Wikipedia, raspberry pi, not just to learn but to own our own distributed infrastructure... the right to own your own email server at home?
may seem utopian, but it not as utopian as the GM Digital Strategy, which literally promises the impossible, a equal economy that is based on centralised power and a Thatcherite trickle-down economy. That is an impossiblity, while a fairer cooperative economy _is_ possible, if collectively, Manchester stands up and demands it, if the tech sector embraces it.


marx talking about cooperatives -


Instead we need to look at Greater Manchester's geniune radical history for inspiration. Trade unions, socialism, Chartists* and cooperative movements are some of these ideas. and  In 1844 the Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers formed, in response to the Industrial Revolution, which was forcing more and more people into poverty to mechinisation of their trades. Nowadays, Manchester is home to the UK largest cooperative - the Cooperative Group. It is somewhat unrecognisable from the traditional cooperatives, with a convoluted and confusing democratic system, unaccountable senior members on massive salaries, resulting little worker control over their activies. [Mondragon is perhaps a better example](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jun/24/alternative-capitalism-mondragon): where workers get to choose which directors to hire and fire, where there is a cap on wage differences, and enables workers to decide what and how they produce.

In the digital sector, cooperative alternatives do exist too. Cooperatives form a key part of the municipal governments economic strategy. Data is not just used as a means to make profit, it is ["treated like it is someone's stuff"](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0038026118758533). Research is published under licences that mean everyone can access information and technologies, encouraging a geniune peer-to-peer economy. Rather than profits being taken outside of the region, to a few rich billionaires, profits are aimed to be redistributed around the city.

Andy Burnham says* that we have no choice but to embrace this model, but of course this is an illusion. We only have no choice if we accept neoliberalism as the only means of managing the economy. But Manchester's history shows an alternative exists; Barcelona is showing how this can work in the digital economy; and of course, he is in a Labour Party, which published a manifesto on alternative forms of ownership, which embraced cooperative ideas and redistributive economics. Allegedly, Andy Burham is a member of the Labour Party - as well as the Co-operative Party, which is linked to Labour - so it is somewhat of a mystery that he is not aware of an alternative! Perhaps he hasn't been paying attention. Of course, getting the all the regions of Greater Manchester to support a cooperative economy would be challenging. Andy Burnham suggests that he want ["Manchester to be the most cooperative place in the UK"](https://party.coop/2018/07/30/andy-burnham-announces-co-operative-commission-to-ensure-manchester-the-most-co-operative-region-of-uk/), but this is totally at odds with the GM digital strategy of attracting massive outside investment from venture capitalists. His statements about having a "small number of evidence sessions" and asking for evidence from experts are signs of someone who wants to hear the case from cooperatives, not someone who really believes in them, or thinks they can become a major part of the local economy. Once workers and society owns and controls the digital economy, we can actually direct investment into building tools that benefit society. However, Andy Burnham's recent attacks on workers organisations suggest that his opinions on workers control may be entirely geniune.

 It is fortunate that others in the party are pushing these ideas. Dan Carden in his manifesto for Sheffield, explicitly [supported cooperative organisations in a local manifesto](https://party.coop/2018/04/20/dan-jarvis-publishes-plans-for-a-co-operative-community-in-south-yorkshire/) to create local economy that is more democratic and equal.


The foreward by the GM mayor and Trafford Council leader Sean Anstree promises a fantastical future for the region. This will make Manchester "one of the best places in the world", where "all voices are heard", a place in which "together, we shape our future". This will create a "world-leading" economy that "draws in investment" from all corners of the world, but also is an economy that built "together" in a "universal" way, where everyone beneifts from a "bottom up" approach. It will be "game-changing", delivering "real change" in a "uniquely Mancunian" way, where technology can help solve our social problems. Andy Burnham is quoted personally, saying "I don't want Greater Manchester to be just a smart city - I want it to be the _smartest_ city". The detail futher on in the document reinforce these messages.


 This frictionless future is a fantasy of a neoliberal zero-gravity utopia where capitalism pushes itself towards light speeds (Featherstone, 2010, IGC9)... which aims to resolve resolve all the failings of the present through more and more technology (Will Self, IGC9). However, these contradictions do not get resolved with more technology; these contradictions _are_ capitalism. The global competition for investment, to be "the smartest city" in practice, becomes are route to becoming the "most privatised city". Public resources such as land, data, money, expertise, and so on are directed into attracting these global businesses. They function as a bribe, but the utopian vision of the smart city believes these will create jobs, equality and security... which will happen at some point in the future... a beautiful future that will never happen. (Grossi, Pianezzi, Smart city utopia paper).





  (the existence of 'losers' as well as economic 'winners' is the terrible aspect of capitalism that we do not acknowledge, but which we still fear). (Enjoying Neoliberalism)

  In Todd McGowan's book, the Psychic Cost of Free Markets, he devotes one chapter to the role of sacrifice in capitalism. Capitalism considers itself beyond religion and God. And yet, everyday, while we work, we sacrifice ourselves for productivity and efficiency.  Our bodies may be damaged, our mental health may erode, we lose free time we could be spending on our hobbies and with our loved ones... the sacrifice in capitalism is the working class, whose lives must be given up willingly. We are promised if we word hard and sacrifice ourselves eventually we are promised to get our reward. We also may sacfice other things: nature, public services, ... etc.



What does this mean for Manchester? Do we have sacrifice everything to make our city as business friendly as possible in order to get to this digital utopia that is within reach?



It is not just open data that these companies are after - your private and personal data will do if they can get it. In 2015(?) (a Google-owned company gained access to the UK's NHS data)[https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/24/smartphone-apps-google-deepmind-nhs-hospitals] to develop new health products. There were many questions about (consent)[https://www.theregister.co.uk/2016/11/22/google_deepmind_signs_5year_agreement_with_nhs_for_streams_app/] because patients never agreed to this, but the company fended off criticism by saying this data (would not be shared with Google HQ)[https://www.wired.co.uk/article/nhs-deepmind-google-data-sharing]. But in 2018 (Google changed its mind)[https://www.wired.co.uk/article/google-deepmind-nhs-health-data] and now it is possible that all of our NHS extremely personal data could be shared with Google and used to track us and our behaviour across the Internet. Rules and regulations function for these insatiable data companies as just part of a game of global domination (a word Mark Zuckerberg loved to use in the early days of Facebook). So, to make Manchester attractive to digital companies, we presumably need to make it asy for them to access our data and to trade it: asking your permission would simply slow down their profits.


Manchester also provides [impressive open data services in Manchester](http://open.manchester.gov.uk/homepage/3/open_data_catalogue), which allow granular access of data on everything from car parks, to metrolinks, to street lighting. Of course, there is a positive element to this: open data can be used by local people to hold the authorities to account and build personal DIY projects. But open data is not happening in Manchester because there is a massive push from the public for it. It is happening because of business demand for our data, and to attract global business. Browing a  list of the open data services around the world, it is clear most of the open data is provided by public institutions, very few by private. When Google are asked why they won't open their services and algorithms, they state that doing so would give advantage to competitors. Why should public institutions open their data sources up if private businesses won't? In our 21st century capitalist economy, everything the public sector does is seen as inefficnent, if a private sector company can use this, they can innovate (obviously its impossible for the public sector to innovate). So it is seen as common sense that eht public sector should open their data and allow private business to profit from it, while the private sector get to keep all of theirs.


### social disaster will be solved with an app

Lots of talk has been in the news recently about AI and automation. Some economists and thinktanks are optimistic, saying that better jobs will be created for everyone, while others like those a the World Economic forum and XX are concerned. Alternative economic thinktanks such as nef, automation, and studies by labour unions are far more pesimistic. What is interesting the pessiissm of Silicon Valley thinkers. Elon Musk, and others have started a organisation to warn people about the dangers of AI, while others like Garcia Martinez have decided that automation will bring about a disaster so big that he is holed out in a forest and armed with guns. But Silicon Valley techies are not doing anything significant to stop this happening. Automation and AI will create vast efficiencies, but with the centralisation of power and wealthy especially in the tech sector, where a few companies monopolise the market, any benefits from this automation will go to a few rich investors and owners, while large parts of the rest of the population will lose our jobs. The Greater Manchester Digital Strategy doesn't deny there could be massive disruption (of the bad kind), saying that new tech could be "hugely disruptive both for the UK but also for the GM economy, having a profound and potentially unprecedented impact on production techniques, supply chains, business models, workforce and global networks." The focus here is on disruption to businesses. The social problems caused by this are left unstated, which stands to reason, since no social scientists or trade unions were invited to contribute.

A [study by PriceWaterhouseCoopers](https://www.pwc.co.uk/services/economics-policy/insights/the-impact-of-automation-on-jobs.html) suggests 30% of jobs could be lost to automation, particularly [low-waged jobs](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/08/the-potential-to-automate-low-wage-jobs-in-the-u-s-and-its-impact-on-workers) and jobs [women bearing the brunt](https://www.thersa.org/about-us/media/2018/women-bearing-the-brunt-of-job-losses-as-age-of-automation-takes-hold-warns-rsa).

One of the surprises  about reading Capital Vol I was how this is so similar to the Victorian era. Reading about the situation with automation of the weavers jobs in the first industrial revolution is impossible to ignore simiarities to the so-called Fourth Industrial Revolution. Weavers collectively resisted automation, destroying machines that threatened their jobs; before turning their attacks on the capitalists who were laying them off rather than the machines. They did not succeed, after after being made redundant, were hired back but on vastly lower wages. By creating mass unemployment, capitalism keeps wages low because we are so desperate to work. These people became known as the Luddites, now an unfair byword for those who hate technology. This is wrong: they hated the way capitalism used technology to destroy them, not the machines themselves (link to capital vol 1). Automation and AI is the 21st Century's nightmare for the working class, and even mega-capitalists such as Elon Musk are considering radical ideas such as UBI. (REFERNCE Automation thinktank).

It shows us a future where all our problems can be solved with an app. There is little analysis of whether apps have solved these social issues in existing smart cities. This is probably because there _are no cities that have solved these social issues with an app_. Even though plenty are trying. For example, Seattle did a great job with their app to solve homelessness, which [served to push out homeless people](https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/06/an-app-for-ejecting-the-homeless/563849/). If that doesn't work, perhaps a Manchester startup can make some [contact lenses that make homeless people disappear](https://www.techrepublic.com/article/silicon-valleys-solutionism-issues-appear-to-be-scaling). Since Manchester council wanted to implement a Public Space Protection Order to get kick homeless out of the city centre, this might an app they would be totally on board with (REF). If we want to help young people find work and training, perhaps could get Facebook to help young people find job opportunities [by spying on their online activies and illegally harvesting their data](http://www.cityam.com/272471/facebook-removes-controversial-app-pays-teenagers-their). As Evgeny Morozov covers in _Click Here to Fix Everything_, an app can solve anything. What social issue have you got? Poor recycling rates? Well - lets make an app that automatically takes pictures of your bins to motivate everyone to recycle! Don't like the greater Manchester politicians - [lets just use algorithms and data and we don't have to have any](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/20/rise-of-data-death-of-politics-evgeny-morozov-algorithmic-regulation).


In _Chaos Monkeys_ by Antionio Garcia Marquez, we are given a personal insight into the world of startups, big tech and venture capitalism. After several years setting up a startup, getting acquired and working for Facebook, concludes that win was get enough "fuck-you money" to live on a yacht the rest of your life by getting acquired, through immoral practices that "nobody was regulating" but other industries, these everyday practices of manipulating prices would result in people "hauled off to jail". The dream of getting acquired, if successful, means the founders get rich, and the acquiring company (Google, Apple, Amazon, Facebook or some other monopoly) gets to own all the good ideas and patents, all of the data, and any innovative technologies.

It is a common part of liberal beliefs that we can all be winners, all equal and successful. At school, children are told about how winning is less important than taking part. It is rarely acknowledged in capitalism that economic losers can exist: we are told that capitalism works for everyone. However, this is somewhat at odds with capitalism since it the basis of capitalism is competition, the driving force (allegedly) of efficiency and innovation. But competition with only winners makes no sense; a competition has losers too. The GM Digital Strategy makes a notable mention of these losers, before moving on.

how often do startups get bought out?

https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/152249

https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/oct/20/tech-startups-facebook-amazon-google-apple
"the endgame is often to be acquired"

http://time.com/3815612/silicon-valley-acquisition/

"Start out, fire the rocket, sell the company, repeat"
How to get aquired - https://medium.com/@jproco/how-to-get-your-startup-acquired-e67f2a5528d8
Facebook was unique in refusing acquirement - not so possible now

google maps, uber, airbnb, consuming public open data to grow...

TECHcrunch - businesses using public data to grow - https://techcrunch.com/2015/08/01/how-businesses-are-leveraging-public-data-to-reach-target-audiences/

https://blogs.sap.com/2018/11/11/why-businesses-should-be-using-public-data/

The Silicon Valley economy is inseperable from its dark side. Increasingly, stories show Silicon Valley creates a faceless, unequal, and ??? society. [Inequality is getting worse](https://www.recode.net/2018/10/13/17953004/wages-workers-silicon-valley-income-inequality) with the rich getting incredibly wealthy, while the poor are worse off. Residents struggle to afford basics such as [housing](https://www.paloaltoonline.com/news/2019/02/15/report-inequality-on-the-rise-in-silicon-valley) in a market where Airbnb and other apps have completely changed the economy, while childcare and transportation are increasingly unaffordable. While most cannot afford transport, workers in tech companies have their own private buses, and anger at their impact on the economy is demonstrated by ([Google's private bus service being attacked](https://mashable.com/2018/01/17/google-bus-attacked/?europe=true). Meanwhile, persoal accounts of the startup industry do not show a world of innovation. [Wendy Liu](https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/digitaliberties/silicon-inquiry/) describes her startup as a "desperate yearning for our startup to mean something", and worked herself into the ground for an illusion. In reality the only startups that get funding are those who make massive returns for private investors. [Antonio Garcia Marquez in Chaos Monkeys](REF) tells a similar story, and after several years in a startup and Facebook concludes that Silicon Valley is an "amoral farce" running on incompetence, greed and vanity, hidden behind a fantasy of meritocracy, a place where massive profits forgives all your sins. In (Move Fast and Break Things)[https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-news/napster-spotify-and-the-fall-of-the-middle-class-musician-116858/], Jonathan Taplin describes how "innovative" sites like Napster and YouTube made many musicians almost peniless. Other horrific stories about Silicon Valley experiences are increasingly widespread.

The Greater Manchester Digital Strategy wants to have the Silicon Valley model of capitalism. They only talk about the shiny facade that presents itself to the world - but this is inseperable from the inequality, exploitation and monopolisation of power that has occurred in California.


### Doing things differently, just like everywhere else

"I want Greater Manchester to be a digital city with a difference", [Andy Burnham](https://www.thinkdigitalpartners.com/news/2017/05/23/burnham-sets-ambitious-plan-future-smart-city-manchester/).



But Andy Burnham didn't invite anyone who would be critical of the Smart City utopia. That would have burst his little fantasy. Academics, campaigners, trade unions and other experts appear to be not invited to feed into this party. Other recent and future events on the digital strategy have focused only on bringing digital experts together, again, excluding anyone social scientists, trade unions, or technology critics. [Loz Kaye remarks on the positivity in the room at these meetings](https://openintelligence.uk/news/technology/greater-manchester-digital-tech-summit/). Well, that's easily achieved by not inviting any critics.
- http://www.digitaltransformationmanchester.co.uk/
- https://designmcr.com/manifesto
- https://www.goodthingsfoundation.org/news-and-blogs/blog/going-digital-greater-manchester-salford-lead

 It is clear then that Manchester's claims to be unique appears to be not grounded in any substance... in 2019 everywhere and everything wants to be smart. The GM Digital strategy says that "we _can_" and "we _must_" (their italics), just like every other city. All these cities are competing to be the winner, to attract the global investors. To win is to be the best, as Burnham puts it, "the _smartest_ city". This is, of course, the smart city version of the famous quote from Thatcher, "there is no alternative". In a way, within the internal logic of neoliberal capitalism, it is true, there is no alternative. You _must_ be more competitive, productive, and efficient. Businesses, countries, and cities have no choice but to do these things, otherwise we will be the economic losers. In the GM Digital Strategy, "winning" is about being the "smartest city" and attracting the most outside investment, and it is clear that many other cities want to be the world leaders too. So in the logic of competition, all these city regions must compete to attract this global investment. Existing businesses "cannot afford to overlook such fundamental shifts in the market". Accept the new digital world, businesses are told, or that will be the end of your business. You "cannot afford" not to. There is no arguing with this, no fighting it, you embrace or die, there is no other way, so the logic goes. What happens if we don't win in this inter-city competition? This is not dicussed... but to keep things simple, lets assume that Manchester does "win", and find out what this looks like
--


The Silicon Valley startup founder exploits themselves and their employees through crazy working hours and awful conditions, while venture capitalists get rich from other people's instenive commitment and long hours of labour, while the founders hope they win the lottery and can escape their role as workers and join the yacht-owning non-working capitalist class. He repeatedly attacks capitalism, which he calls an "amoral farce", a game with "other people's money".   Andy Burnham's statement that he will "not tolerate" increasing division and inequality will crash into the reality of privatisation and profits. When it comes to the crunch, centrist politicians like Burnham will always choose "the economy" over social equality, unless there is massive social pressure. 
